- Brett, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
You've been here a time or two?
Always great to have you here.
- Well, thanks for having me yet again, Michael.
I'm glad I've not worn out my welcome quite yet.
- You always have so much cool stuff going on
and so many interesting perspectives.
- Some would call them interesting,
whether that's a positive or negative,
is still open to interpretation.
- May you program in interesting times,
as the old ancient proverb goes.
- Mm-hmm.
- So, been here a bunch of times,
but real quick, just tell people a bit about yourself
before we jump in.
- Sure.
- Just in case they don't know you.
- Yeah, name's Brett Cannon.
I live in Vancouver on the unceded territories
of the Squamish, Tsleil-Waututh,
and Musqueam First Nations.
I am currently the dev manager
for the Python extension in VS Code.
I am serving my fifth and, as of now,
final term on the Python Steering Council.
I'm stepping down just 'cause,
when we first created the Steering Council,
I said five years seemed like a good term limit.
We actually don't have term limits,
but I figured I'd stick to my word.
And I'm also the social core developer.
I've been doing it for just over 20 years.
Lucky for me, I got my first commit bit
right after the, sorry,
my first commit bit after the first PyCon,
so I get to use the PyCon anniversaries
as a way to keep track of that, so that's convenient.
- Yeah.
- That's kind of the biggies.
Have a cat. - Yeah.
Something about VS Code is that,
I've heard that word, it's an editor, right?
- Yeah, I know.
Someday you'll say you use it,
and I'll be very happy that day.
- I had it open today.
- Oh, all right, well, I'm happy today then.
- Yes, indeed.
No, awesome.
So many cool things you got going on.
And despite all of that background
in Steering Council, Core Dev,
here, this time, you're here to give us
diet advice, eating advice, something about sugar.
What is it?
- Yeah, so, just a slight story behind all this.
So my wife was taking the certificate in data science course
at the University of British Columbia,
which is actually our alma mater and where we met.
And she was doing her homework
in a JupyterLab notebook through the browser
via JupyterHub.
And she stopped doing the homework to go,
I can't remember if it was lunch or dinner,
but basically stepped away for like an hour or so.
And then she came back,
and the run buttons on the cells weren't working anymore.
I was like, well, what's going on?
And I looked, and it's like, oh, well,
you got disconnected from the server.
I said, well, isn't that happening in the browser?
Like, no, Python doesn't run in the browser right now.
It's not a thing.
I'm like, oh, okay.
And then I think about a day or two later
after she'd thought about it a bit,
we were in the car,
and I still remember the exact location in Vancouver
where this occurred.
My wife said, you know, you should probably fix that problem
of Python not working in the browser.
And I explained like what WebAssembly was
and how big of a thing that would be
to make that all happen and all that.
And she literally took about a beat to wait and said,
no, you should go fix that.
So part of that led me down the road
of trying to figure out
what the minimum viable Python was, right?
Like what is the minimal amount of Python
I would have to implement in the browser
or in WebAssembly in this case to make Python work?
And I realized that, you know,
a decent amount of Python is actually
what's called syntactic sugar,
which is really just syntax that you could actually
devolve and unravel into other syntax of a language
and have it do the exact same thing, right?
It's just basically syntax as a shortcut.
And so I ended up going on this very long journey,
unexpectedly long,
of trying to go through all the Python syntax
and trying to figure out which parts of the syntax
was like crucial and you couldn't actually re-implement it
in pure Python itself,
and which parts you could actually just
make it work with Python code itself.
With the idea that at the end,
it would have basically a list of the bits of Python
that an interpreter would have to implement
and the other bits of syntax
where you could run some tool over it ahead of time,
it would just translate from Python
to different Python code.
And in that way, I would just know
what the exact target would have to be.
It might not run very fast, don't get me wrong,
but it would at least be a very clear definition
of kind of what you have to have
to really call something Python
'cause everything else you could kind of just work around.
- Right, so the standard Python syntax we expect still works,
but how much do you have to work behind the scenes
to make that happen?
So examples that come to mind for me
are context managers, the with block.
Awesome, I love them, but we have try finally,
and you could simulate a context manager effectively
with maybe a try finally, maybe an accepts in there as well,
but you don't actually need with in the language
to accomplish what it does, right?
- Yeah, decorators are also another really good example,
right, like where the concepts for that syntax predates it.
And it happened to just be something
where Python core development team
looked at where people were in terms of development
and what they needed from Python and realized,
you know what, that common pattern that people are doing
would actually be, would be very well served
via a piece of syntax.
So why don't we just do that?
Why don't we introduce that piece of syntax,
make these up?
As you said, with context managers,
we're a perfect example, right?
Where before, if you wanted to do the right thing
when you opened a file, is you call the open function
for your file, assign it to a variable,
do your try block of everything you wanna do with the file,
and then in the finally part of the try finally,
close that file.
Which, I mean, if you just think about it
compared to a with statement is four lines,
assuming you're doing reasonable formatting
for the assignment, the try, the finally,
then the close call, versus the single with open
to get the exact same effect.
- Yeah.
And then you've also got the possibility
that the context manager,
the thing that's used in the with block,
can do something different if there's an exception, right?
Like if there's an exception, it could say,
if it's a database transaction,
it could roll back the transaction automatically.
Rather, if there's no exception,
it could commit it automatically.
- Right, but there's no real magic there
if you think about it in the end.
You could have written that all up by hand.
It just would have been cumbersome.
But that makes the with statement
very much a piece of syntactic sugar
where you could totally write it out,
get the exact same semantic outcome.
- Probably similar performance as well, maybe.
- Yeah, I think it depends.
It really depends on the syntax, right?
Like how complicated it is,
how much of it's gonna call into,
at least in CPython's case, into the C code
and stay in the C code,
versus not like with context managers,
it probably won't just because the point
is you're gonna call that dunder enter method
or that dunder exit method.
So you're calling Python code,
so no real, probably big shift.
But for stuff that we'll probably cover in this podcast,
there are other bits that go into the C code
and stay in the C code.
And when that happens, stuff can go really, really fast.
Especially with all the work
the Faster CPython team's done around stuff and all that.
So the point is you can just start
to just kind of leap into C code,
stay there and get stuff done way faster,
comparative to writing out by hand
where if you're staying in the Python world,
it can just take a bit longer.
- Yeah, so sugar, the word sugar,
I think it's a good one here.
I love like these ideas like code smells,
code sugar, all the things.
It makes it sound a little frivolous, maybe.
Like a little, it's nice to have it,
sweetens it up, you don't really need it.
But I do think having these different constructs,
like when you see a with block,
it instantly conveys meaning.
It means we're gonna create a thing,
we have a cleanup section, we don't have to deal with it.
As opposed to if you see a try except finally,
you have to read it and process it.
Okay, does it actually do the things
that would be accomplished?
I think these sugars let you also think,
not just write less good,
but think in different levels of abstraction.
- Yeah, I mean, as you said,
the use of the word sugar is meant to mean
something sweet, something nice.
It's a treat, it's a bonus.
So from the perspective of if you didn't have it,
you could still accomplish it.
But that can potentially, in a way, as you suggested,
not quite denote the benefit of it, right?
Like if we think of sugar in terms of
not something good for your diet.
- Yeah, what is your perspective on sugar?
Are you a fan of desserts or are you trying to cut it out?
- Yeah, exactly.
So, but yeah, I mean, the hope is
whenever we add syntax to Python,
it's for everyone's general benefit, right?
This is why we don't do it very often.
And when we do do it, it's a very thoughtful discussion,
very long discussion, sometimes contentious discussion.
Walrus Operator is the famous one for that.
- I don't understand the contention of the Walrus Operator.
It's such a small change to the language.
There's so many other things that are bigger changes
that could have been battles,
but I guess it just came to a head at that point
or something, right?
- Yeah, I mean, for those of you who don't know,
the Walrus Operator is the thing that pushed Guido
kind of over the edge to finally step down
as being the dictator for life.
And it was just due to the veracity of the opposition to it
and just how basically angry it made people.
And you're right, it's very small.
And to be honest, I've used it and I like it.
I get use out of it.
It means I use it for its purpose,
which was to add some basic syntax for those situations
where you always have that assignment,
and then you do something like an if or something,
and then you're gonna do something,
like just be able to inline certain things
to just do the right thing.
It's not a huge thing, but it's a nice thing.
And in that case, I don't know.
Honestly, a lot of people got really concerned
that they didn't see the usefulness enough,
that they thought it was gonna be a slippery slope,
or people are always very concerned
about Python getting too big
and that's no longer fitting in their brain.
- Yeah, maybe it was kind of the last straw sort of thing,
rather than like maybe stuff came before
and they're like, all right, that's it.
And now the Walrus, the Walrus, like, I don't know.
- I don't know.
I mean, I don't think people realize
that we actually cut syntax out
when we moved from Python 2 to Python 3, right?
Like there was actual-- - Yeah, that was all
kind of brewing.
- Yeah, like the backticks went away.
Like no one knows about backticks anymore,
but we used to have syntax for using backticks,
and that's gone now.
So it's not like it's always been a add, add, add.
But I think it's just one of these things
where it's just people were very concerned
that Python would get too big, too complicated,
and it wouldn't be fully understandable.
I will say whenever we do this,
we very much consider how easy it would be
to understand if you saw it for the first time
and never received any instruction about it, right?
Like I would argue that Walrus Operator is a bit obvious
if you look at the code around it of what it does.
And so you can probably figure out what it does
without being told ahead of time
versus other syntax in other languages
where we go, I have no clue what this does.
- Right, exactly.
- Like why does plus plus and C do different things
if it's in the front or the back,
and what's the difference, right?
Like unless you know prefix versus suffix,
increment, and the difference in terms of referencing
the pointer and all this crazy stuff,
like you're not gonna necessarily pick up on the difference
unless you run your code,
versus something where you can just look at it
and just learn on the spot.
- Yeah.
Well, I wanna give you all a bit of a compliment, I guess,
or encouragement.
I think the Python language is not changing too fast.
I think the stability over time is really good.
You compare that to other languages.
I mean, here's one that's kind of close to home for you
since you're at Microsoft, like C#.
I feel like that language, it's pretty nice,
at least in the early days.
And now there's a whole team who are employed.
You don't have to make any comment, I know you work there,
but there's a whole team who's employed
to like shepherd that language.
And I feel like there's a feeling
that they always need to have some new language features
because it's their job to have language features.
And there's just like a constant kind of trend,
like for properties, like we have properties,
they have properties.
But I think there's four to five different ways
that properties in C# that have evolved over time.
And you're just like, yes, a little better,
but it's why do we have so many ways
if you're gonna be that, right?
And so when I at least look at Python
compared to like my background in C++ or in C#
or JavaScript, I feel like it's comfortable.
It's not stale, but it's not,
we don't have five ways to do properties.
You know, and that's a good thing.
Even if there's a better way to do it,
it might not be worth having two to three ways
just for that, for a slight advantage.
- Well, thank you for the kind words.
Yeah, I mean, we do have, the Zen of Python
does kind of outline the general guidelines
we try to follow when doing,
making these discussions, decisions.
For those who've never read the Zen of Python,
just run import this from the REPL and you'll find it.
And yeah, it's just the way it's designed, right?
Hopefully there's one,
hopefully only one obvious way to do anything.
And so it's just something we've kind of leaned into.
Now, granted, things shift,
like I'm sure someone will point out
the myriad of ways you can format a string now,
but a lot of that's backwards compatibility
and just realizing, you know what?
We just have to accept the fact
the first way we got it is no longer
the best way we can think of.
And it's enough of a jump from using string interpolation
with the percent sign to using f-strings
that it was worth adding a second way.
Now, maybe someday we'll take out string interpolation.
I doubt it 'cause it just works and it's just sitting there
and it's not worth breaking really old code.
But I mean, yeah, it's just the way we approach things.
And luckily most people like it.
And I think that's kind of why some people always freak out
is they're always afraid somehow
we're gonna go downhill from here
and it's just the start of things
or somehow Python is gonna be harder to learn.
Well, we very much try to make sure
Python is a gradual curve of learning, right?
The basics are very straightforward and good.
And as you get into more advanced things
like the match statement, right?
Like you'll be able to see it and understand it
and it'll make sense,
but not something you'll necessarily learn
the first month or two,
but it's there for when you do need it, right?
Like we very much try to make sure
that everything makes sense on a curve
from beginner to advanced
and try to make sure the language is useful to everyone
from both a beginner to advanced user.
It's tricky, but I'd like to do a decent job.
- I think you are.
I think one of Python's really,
one of its powers is that you can be super effective with it
with a really partial understanding of what it is.
- Yeah.
- Right?
You don't have to understand namespaces, classes,
async, et cetera, et cetera.
You just like, well,
I think I can write these four lines
in a, without even a function
and I'll get a cool graph that'll show my work
or whatever, right?
- Yep, exactly.
- Yep.
So, and I think I have a pretty partial understanding
of the match statement.
I know it can get pretty advanced
in like how it captures and changes values,
but I wrote one yesterday with a partial understanding.
It went great.
- Nice.
- Yeah, indeed.
All right.
Before we move on though,
gotta go back to your opening
because you said,
"I created this to understand,
like if I were to solve that problem,"
your wife had about like,
"You gotta fix that thing about the browser."
And I know there's some folks in Texas
who have thoughts on this as well,
on the PyScript team.
But is this a project you're actively working on
or just a, let me gather up,
do some research and deep thinking
about what is actually in the language
that would have to carry over
or what is this?
- No, it's not an active project of mine at the moment.
It ended up being mostly just an exercise
and just snowballed into a thing
where I just didn't wanna stop until I completed it.
- Yeah.
How do you feel about the MicroPython,
PyScript angle of approaching this?
- Yeah, I mean, I think it's great.
I mean, that was the other hopeful benefit
about all of this,
is trying to nail down the definition of what Python is.
- Yeah.
- 'Cause I've heard those arguments
made against MicroPython,
that it's not quite Python
'cause it doesn't quite run all the syntax
or it doesn't have the entire standard library.
I've gotten into arguments with people online
where they got very upset when I suggested
that the REPL was an optional part of Python
and actually not a requirement.
And so I just viewed it as a learning experience for me,
hopefully a learning experience for others as well.
And then after that was just trying to hopefully clarify,
like, look, this is truly what you have to have
to really be Python.
Like you literally cannot implement
the rest of the language without this,
but everything else, you could totally just do it yourself.
You could totally just write your tool to make it all work.
And as long as this existed,
you could totally get by with it.
And so that's kind of where I ended up.
I, luckily the tooling around WebAssembly
got far enough along,
Pyodites continue to do well in the browser.
I've been working on the WebAssembly,
the system interface Wazzy side of things,
and that's been going pretty well.
So that's at least taking care of itself.
So I've ultimately not tackled the huge problem
of trying to re-implement Python from scratch,
probably in Rust, just in a minimal fashion
to try to make it work better in the browser.
That's probably a project for when I retire.
And I suspect that's at least a decade out, if not more.
So that's probably gonna be put on the back burner
for a while.
- Right, yeah.
You could all install BPython
and run Brett Python built in Rust.
- Yeah, there you go.
(laughing)
- Rust does seem to be having quite the influence,
an outsized influence for how popular Rust is
in terms of the number of developers,
but it seems to be really leaving its mark on Python
and other areas as well these days.
- Yeah, well, I mean, I will fully admit I have bias
'cause I am a fan and I do like using the language,
but it's one of those things where
if you've been living in the C and C++ world
and it never was that satisfying to you,
but you had to be there for whatever reason,
and then you discover Rust and it does things
that saves you from very chronic set of problems.
Yeah, including yourself.
You would hope that people would notice and latch onto it.
I think that's basically what's happened
is people have just discovered that,
oh yeah, this is useful and good.
There's enough C and C++ code in the Python community
due to C, Python, C API
that I think there's just a nice cross-section.
I think it's just one of these things
where people have just gone like,
well, I've gotta do the system level programming anyway,
so I might as well use something that seems like a better--
- A little more modern. - A little more modern.
Yeah, a bit more modern.
And so I think that's kind of what's happened here.
- That makes sense.
All right, let's talk about the sugar.
- Okay.
- So I think we covered pretty much what syntactic sugar is.
And yeah, you started this whole thing out saying
the goal of this is really to kind of nail down
that minimum Python.
And I agree that the REPL is optional.
I like the REPL, but just so I can also get mail.
I like the language,
like you can't take away these features
once you add them, right?
And so it's like, what could you survive with as a minimum?
And then you can kind of like, what's the extras?
- Yeah, what could you build up from there?
- Yes, exactly.
And the final destination maybe being CPython proper.
Yeah.
So you've got a whole bunch of different aspects of Python
that you are unraveling in this syntactic sugar.
And basically to highlight what's actually happening,
how much of this is going on as you've already laid out.
So I wanna point out that I'll link to,
I don't know how many articles you've got here,
but two years.
- Over 20, I think.
- Yeah, like looking like close to 30, maybe.
I don't know, just eyeballing it.
There's a lot there.
So I think I've picked us, you know, half of those hours,
some reasonable subset that we can talk about.
And there's some code and stuff in here.
So we'll kind of have like,
my thought was we could just talk about kind of like,
what is the essence of this?
Like what's really happening when you do attribute access?
What's really happening when you write the word pass
or use a with block that we've talked about a little bit.
So the first one here is unraveling attribute access
in Python.
You wanna tell us a bit about what actually happens
if you just say, you know, like object dot attribute?
It seems so simple, Brett.
There's just one dot.
What's the big deal?
- Yeah, why doesn't this just, what's there to talk about?
I mean, when I just do something dot something,
magically I get back what I expected.
But there's actually a lot going on there, right?
And it comes down to multiple layers,
but it's all ties around Python's object model, right?
How do all, 'cause I always find this weird to say,
but Python's more object oriented,
in my opinion, than Java, right?
Java has these primitive types like ints and floats
that have to get boxed and unboxed to fake,
to make them look like an object to Java itself.
Python doesn't have that.
Everything is an object.
A function is an object.
An integer is an object.
- True is an object.
Seven is an object.
- Exactly.
There's nothing you can name in Python
that's not somehow an object.
- Yep.
- So this idea of attributes and all this
permeates all the way down into the object model,
which once again, defines kind of everything in a way.
So the key thing here is there's kind of two parts to it.
It's how do you look up,
how do you look up based on inheritance,
what thing is going to service the call asking
what is this attributes value basically,
or what object is bound to this name for the attribute?
And after that is what methods are gonna get called
to make that happen?
'Cause effectively, almost everything in Python
at the end of the day leads to a method call
or a function call.
- Yeah.
First of all, it leads to a lot of times to an op code,
which leads to a method call, right?
A Python bytecode thing.
And I think it's maybe also worth pointing out,
like have you point out to everyone listening is,
Python compiles to this intermediate language
like Java and .NET compile to intermediate languages.
It's just what happens then, right?
Like in those other ones,
they JIT compile to machine instructions.
Here it goes through like the big C eval loop
and delegates to some internal C operations.
And a lot of these unravelings,
like kind of look at what happens at that step, right?
- Yeah, so, yeah.
So CPython itself is an interpreter, right?
So what happens is when you load up your Python code
is Python parses it,
creates what's called an abstract syntax tree or AST.
It then takes that AST, does some stuff with it,
and then it compiles it down to Python bytecode.
I actually gave a talk on this at PyCon Canada,
way back when for those who are interested,
that basically goes from the steps of literally source code
all the way to execution, if you want more detail.
But effectively, yeah, we can pile it down to bytecode
of our own design to then execute in more or less
what's a big for loop in C.
- That is really big for loop.
- Very big for loop.
And it's gotten a bit fancier
thanks to the faster CPython team, right?
Like there's now kind of like lower level opcodes
that are very type specific
and we actually auto generate the loop now,
thanks to them so that it's easier to maintain
and make tweaks to.
But essentially it's literally just a set of instructions
that are extreme,
that kind of encompass key bits of semantics in Python.
So for instance, for attribute access,
there's literally a opcode called load adder, right?
Where on the execution stack,
you basically push the object you care about,
the name of the thing you want,
and then you just call load adder on it
and it'll just look it up.
Actually, technically, I guess it doesn't push the name on it
that's technically stored in the function.
There's little details on kind of hand-waving over,
literally hand-waving if you're watching the live stream,
but effectively you push the object you want,
you call load adder,
give it an argument of what attribute it wants,
and then load adder opcode behind the scenes
is the thing that does all the magic
of calling everything you'd expect, et cetera, et cetera.
- Yeah, excellent.
And to view that, a lot of times what you'll do
is you'll just use the dis module.
So if people haven't used dis, you can just,
dis.dis, a lot of disrespect on this function,
and then it tells you what the opcodes it's made of are.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, dis is short for disassemble.
So literally you can pass it a function
and it will effectively disassemble
what the function does into the bytecode,
which is just stored as an attribute of bytes
on the function object
and printed out nicely 'cause the dis module
knows how to map the bytes to what the opcode's name is
and just gives it a nice way to look at
and actually read and understand it.
- Yeah.
Okay, and so then in this example, you said,
"Look, here's the case statement
"in that tremendous for loop switch thing
"that does the execution.
"What do we do if we see load adder?"
And ultimately it comes down to this pyobject_get adder.
So it seems so simple.
You just object.attribute, object.field, whatever.
But it turns out there's just so many variations
and so much going on down here.
And I don't necessarily want you to go through
all the details 'cause it's pretty,
some of it's pretty intense C
and a lot of it, optimizations and stuff.
But just give people a sense of what actually happens
down in the guts when you try to do it.
- Well, so in the case of attribute access,
that effectively ends up calling
the get adder built-in function.
And in that case, it needs to check
how many arguments it gets to start.
Did you give it two arguments
or did you give it three arguments
so you return a default value
if the attribute doesn't exist?
And then at the C level,
we have to check what you gave it
because just like a Python level,
or the C code all types to what's called the toPy object,
which is basically a massive struct in C
that represents any and all Python objects.
So even at the C level,
we don't know if you gave us a string or an integer
or what did you give us for the name
of the attribute that you want.
So we gotta do that, right?
And so there's just basic,
like just safety checks to go like, nope.
Like if you call get adder with wanting the attribute 42,
which is a number, it's gonna throw a type error.
Well, that code's gotta exist somewhere
and this is where it exists, right?
And then effectively just bubbles all down to the C API
where a lot of this stuff gets exposed in its own way.
And specifically in this case,
ends up calling PyObject get adder.
- Yeah, and I think another thing
that's pretty interesting here is,
it's not always just a value, right?
That object.adder, that adder could be a property.
That adder could be a descriptor,
which I guess is a generalization of a property.
It could be on the class type,
but not on the instance types, you gotta find that.
It could be on the instant type overriding,
but only there, right?
Like it could not exist.
All of these scenarios you gotta go through.
And so it really emphasizes how much
is actually going on in the runtime
while this single simple line seems to be running, right?
- Yeah, I mean, in the simple case, right?
Hitting the dots, not complicated.
Like in general, what you end up doing
is you have your object, you hit dot,
and what it does is it looks in the dunderdict attribute
of the object and there's a key matching that to rename
and it just gets the thing in the dictionary and that's it.
You're done.
But as you alluded to,
how the heck do you even get to that basic case
or those more complicated cases, as you said, descriptors,
right, which are how we actually implement properties
or if it's on the class versus the instance
and what happens if there's inheritance
or multiple inheritance
or dunder get adder was defined, right?
Like basically almost all of this ends up flowing through
the get adder built-in,
which effectively ends up calling the appropriate
dunder get attribute method off of an object.
And this is one of those bare level kind of things, right?
Where you have to implement this to make Python work.
You have to basically implement the get adder built-in
and it has to understand how objects are structured
underneath the hood to know how basically methods
and stuff are attached to an object.
You really can't fake that.
There's no way to not kind of have that
as a low level detail that you can just unravel.
It has to be implemented by the interpreter.
And in this case, effectively,
the way Python does things is it knows the order.
You can always actually call the MRO method on any object
and it will return you the method resolution order.
And effectively what Python's doing
is if it checks on something to see if it has it or not,
it will effectively end up calling
the dunder get attribute object, method, sorry, on object.
That's usually where it bottoms out.
And unless you happen to have a dunder get adder,
if that fails, but that's only in the failure case.
But really in the end,
almost everything passes through object.dunder get attribute.
And that's really where all this ends up going.
But as you said, there's a lot of little twists and turns.
- Yeah, a lot of these internals,
you'll see the method resolution order calls
and it's all about, well, there's a lot of classes
and a lot of objects, they can override things
and they can override operators.
And so there's a lot of navigation to just figure it out,
not just calling these get adder type of things,
but like what level does that even supposed to happen on
given what I'm working with, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
And I think this is a good example.
And the reason I started with this,
it's so fundamental, right?
Like how do you unravel something
if you don't know how to even get an attribute
off of something?
So this is why this was the very first post in this series.
And partially why I went into such detail
on how to figure all this out, right?
Like kind of one, this is almost a template
for anyone else who wanted to go exploring on their own.
But I think it's also a good example
of how much complexity and flexibility
Python hides from users in order to make the simple work,
but give you the flexibility
to make the complicated possible, right?
- Yeah.
- Like for the vast majority of any of us for our code,
it just does what you would think it would do
and it's pretty straightforward.
But as soon as you get into the fancy world of descriptors
or gender-coordinated-- - SQLAlchemy.
- Yeah.
- I can both have a value
or I can do a database query with the same thing.
How is that possible, right?
Yeah.
- You want that magic?
Language has to support it somehow.
And it requires a lot of finesse and thinking through
and a lot of mechanisms that generally get hidden from you.
But someone's got to write that code somewhere.
And in this case, it's a Python
and this kind of outlines how that all happens.
And it's surprisingly complicated.
It's not horrible.
- That was my main takeaway too.
- Yeah, I mean, you can totally read it and follow it.
I don't wanna scare anyone saying it's so complex
you can't follow it.
It's just, it's not just a simple,
like two if statements and you're done.
It's like, no, there's subtlety to it
to make sure the common semantics makes sense to people.
It's not gonna trip people up
because it's doing something weird, right?
There's a lot of thought that goes into these semantics
to make sure it makes sense for the common case.
- Another takeaway I got from looking at this is,
wow, it's nice that dictionaries are fast.
And how fast are they to make this possible
to lean on them so much to make this happen?
- Yeah, I mean, I will say when Guido
chose to use dictionaries as the namespace,
it was kind of a unique decision at the time.
It might still be, honestly.
But it did simplify some things conceptually
and also made it so that any wins in how dictionaries work
is just a massive win universally across the language.
Right, like if you make dictionaries work in any way better,
you not only make it work when you just,
you personally use it as a data structure, as a container,
but also literally every attribute access
will get faster, right?
Like there's a reason why it's so fine-tuned
and why we don't really touch it very much
'cause it's been tweaked over the decades
by a lot of people to be extremely fast
and for good reason.
- Yep, indeed.
One final thought on this.
You know, you think of optimizing both the memory
and also the performance a little bit
by doing things like slots on your classes
to maybe like short-circuit some of this.
It feels like somewhere in this world
lives like some kind of massive optimization
that maybe, if you said, for this class,
I'm gonna give up some flexibility,
is there some way attribute reads and writes
could get lots faster?
I don't know, what are you,
I'm sure this has gone round and round.
It's such a hot, it's just involved
in almost every line of Python code and stuff like this.
- Oh yeah, and this plays into
what the Faster CPython team has been doing,
trying to make things faster by looking at
what the patterns are and if you can just skip stuff.
How do you short-circuit this thing?
Can you go like, well, I just know this object
always look this way.
Like this was some of the stuff
that the self-programming language team
at UC Santa Barbara did, I think in the 70s, maybe 80s.
I'm just like, well, if we know the layout of the object
is gonna be consistent.
- Yeah, can we go seven bytes in and get four bytes?
That kind of thing, right?
- Exactly, and you just kind of have to,
and you start to be able to calculate the shortcuts
and go like, hey, did anything change
from the last time I made this assumption?
No, okay, well then I can use my assumption that's right.
- Nobody's mocked it, nobody's dynamically messed with it.
Like maybe it is just a plain thing
until somebody puts it into an edge case,
is there a short circuit, right?
- Yeah, and I mean, I don't wanna go off on a tangent,
but I mean--
- Well, I'm one of 17 topics here, Brad.
Like, no problem, we got lots of time.
- I have thought about like, after doing this,
what, is there something syntactic here to add, right?
Is there a way to kind of come up with a,
effectively a class definition that's way simpler
for the really common cases
that could be optimized extremely fast
because you give away some flexibility
and then the interpreter can make assumptions,
PyPy can make assumptions, et cetera, et cetera.
And would there be enough wins on that
to warrant doing it, right?
Like, could we take the concept of kind of a data class
that was just data roughly or something along those lines
and just what could we get out of it
and what kind of perf wins could we get out of it?
And would it be worth it?
Would it be worth adding syntax to the language
for that case?
If you look at Mojo, for instance, they have a struct
and that struct works in a very specific way for performance
because when you say like this thing can't have new
attributes, which you can do with slots.
And for those of you who don't know what slots are,
if you define a dunder slots attribute on your class,
you're effectively telling Python,
don't create a dictionary for me,
just create effectively a list underneath.
It's technically a C array.
And when I need to access something,
just get it off this array.
So there's no dictionary.
You can skip all that dictionary overhead.
Plus you shrink the memory because now the only amount
of memory you need is that array for pointers
to the PI objects and not the dictionary,
which grows and shrinks and who knows
what size it's gonna be.
If we had that built in syntactically,
would that be beneficial to people or not?
And I have a prototype in Python code
of what I'm thinking of.
I did a blog post on this earlier this year
to try to feel out people in the community
and what they thought in terms of restrictions
and would that be too much or too little.
I've subsequently prototyped what I wanted
and there'll be a followup blog post
about this is where it sits now, what do people think?
And do people think this is worth trying
to get syntax for, just don't worry about it.
It's too close to data classes or what?
- Maybe it could be a keyword to the data class decorator
that just makes it behave differently.
- Yeah, but so unfortunately the tricky bit with that
is it's still flowing through Python code, right?
Data classes is still just a module in the standard library.
So you can't, it's really hard to optimize that stuff
without syntax to specifically say,
hey, this will be different.
You get to treat it differently
and we can literally lock it down
by literally creating a different type of object
at the C level that just literally doesn't give you access.
Tuples are a good example.
Tuples at the C level very much just don't implement
the stuff that let you mutate it.
What happens if we wanna do that for classes?
How do you do frozen data classes?
It's a ton of properties.
But what happens if we had a way to just say,
yep, nope, we're just literally not giving you access.
Would that, how much faster could that be?
Like, I don't know, but I suspect it would be
decently faster.
- Yeah, computers are surprisingly fast.
Dictionaries are surprisingly fast,
but there's a lot of stuff here that could be skipped
and I think might be, to me, I had the same thought
at least, probably not with the level of sophistication
you did, but like, wow, there's some way to sort of do
more of a C style, just like we know the structure
and the offsets.
- Yeah.
- Like for a restricted set, because that restricted set
is mostly what people do actually do in Python.
They don't go crazy dynamic with stuff coming and going,
like sometimes, but not usually.
- Yeah, I mean, you can go read my original blog posts
and if you follow me on Mastodon,
you can see the follow-up conversations.
But like the original thing, if you've been a long time
Java user, you'll know the acronym POJO,
plain old Java object, is effectively the equivalent
for Python.
Some people love that idea, some people are like,
I really need methods, I can't not have methods
kind of thing.
It really depends on what people are after
and what they think makes sense.
But there will be a follow-up blog post,
so if you follow my blog, you'll eventually see
what this hopefully all leads to, which may be nowhere
beyond what I put up on PyPI, but who knows,
maybe it'll become syntax someday.
It really depends on how the community reacts to it.
- Cool, well, I didn't know you were looking into that,
so very interesting.
Next one, let's move on to something that also seems
pretty straightforward, is A minus B.
- Yeah, right.
Yeah, exactly, you think it makes, yeah,
how hard can A minus B be, right?
Like two objects just subtracting from one another, right?
We all know how this works.
There's, I mean, there's an opcode just called
binary subtract, just like there's a binary add,
a binary multiply, a binary divide.
- You put the numbers on the register,
you do the instruction set on the CPU,
and you're good to go.
- Yeah, hey, I know what five minus three is,
how much work can it be to make that work in Python?
(Lyle laughs)
- Oh yeah, the numbers happen to be arbitrarily large,
and sometimes they're not numbers, sometimes they're
matrices or strings or, oh boy, okay.
- Exactly, and subtraction's not communicative,
so order matters here, so yeah,
it gets surprisingly complicated very quickly.
- Yeah.
- So, yeah, from a conceptual level, yeah,
it seems simple, but when you figure out
what that opcode actually does, it becomes way fancier.
- Yeah, and so as you dig into this,
you start to realize, like, okay, so this is actually
controlled by the dunder sub operator on the type, right?
And then how do you get that method?
Well, this is the method resolution order on that type,
so you gotta start navigating that,
and that gets pretty interesting, right?
- Yeah, well, and let's be clear here,
you're a bit foreshadowing because you said,
oh, you called the dunder sub, yeah,
to start, if that works, right?
Like, there's some, for a lot of these things,
there's lots of fallback to, once again,
give you that flexibility to make things work as necessary.
So for a lot of things in Python,
you can return the not implemented singleton,
which you may have, some people may have noticed
and wondered what the hell is this thing for,
and it's a singleton to signal to Python that,
hey, it's not that an error happened,
it's just, I just don't know how to handle this, right?
So, for instance, if, let's say you have
left-hand side minus right-hand side, right?
So the first step is you check to see
if the left-hand side has a dunder sub method, okay?
If it does, you can call that with left-hand side.dundersub
and pass in right-hand side.
Well, that method has the option to do something
and return a value, and that's what left-hand side
minus right-hand side becomes,
or it can return not implemented and say,
just tell Python, nope, I don't know how to do this,
probably should ask someone else, right?
And then this adds an extra little wrinkle now,
because suddenly when you do that, that says,
okay, well, you know what?
Let's give the right-hand side a try.
Maybe the right-hand side knows how to do
left-hand side minus right-hand side.
It might not be the front thing,
but it might just magically know, right?
So in this case, for instance,
let's say you have, you could have something of
your fancy object minus four,
which would be your dunder sub method.
And so you know how to handle integers and it works.
But what happens if it's four minus your object?
- Yeah, four doesn't know what to do.
- Yeah, four's never seen your thing before.
I don't know what the heck to do here.
So in that case, four would return not implemented,
saying, I don't know what to do here.
Good luck to you, maybe you'll figure it out.
And in this case, your object dunder rsub
would get called with four.
And then maybe you'll be able to say like,
hey, I might not be on the left-hand side,
but I know how to handle myself on the right-hand side
and I can make this work.
So we try to make sure that even if some other objects
don't know how to work with you,
as if you're involved, there's at least the opportunity
for you to make it work.
- Yeah, that's pretty interesting.
- Yes.
- An example could be like the number four constant
minus a vector.
It's meant to be like a mathematical vector.
And it's like, okay, we just subtract that
from every dimension, right?
And that would be totally reasonable,
but the four has no idea how to do that.
- Yes.
- Yeah.
- And this is still the simple case.
- So if I'll need a,
I need a slight refresher on this one,
but effectively there's scenarios here
where you call the right-hand side first
if it's, I can't remember if it is.
- The left-hand side one can say,
I don't know what to do with this object, I think,
and return and not implement it from the subtract.
- Right.
- Something like that, right?
- There's also subtle optimization
in these binary operators where if it is a direct subclass
of the other object, you get first dibs.
- Oh, right, right, right.
- So that's the thing.
So once again-
- Yeah, there's a lot of spam and bacon
and vegetable spam and stuff that you did in here
that people can check out.
- It gets surprisingly complicated,
but the thing here basically,
this is, let's say you have a left-hand side
and a right-hand side, right?
Once again, left-hand side minus right-hand side.
Left-hand side might be an integer.
Your right-hand side though might be a subclass of integer,
like fancy integer, okay?
Now, if you do int minus fancy int,
it will understand how to do it because you're a subclass.
So it's just gonna do it,
and it'll just do the math and return you whatever it is.
So like if you did five minus fancy three,
five's gonna return the integer two.
But maybe that's not what you want with your fancy int.
Maybe you'd rather get fancy int two.
So how does Python make sure that you get that opportunity
if you happen to be on the right-hand side
instead of the left-hand side?
Well, in that case, Python checks first.
Okay, I have a left-hand side
and a right-hand side for subtraction.
Is the right-hand side a direct subclass
of the left-hand side?
If that's true, then you know what?
I'm gonna give the right-hand side a chance first
so that they can return their subclass
and not have the left-hand side kind of just blindly
not realize that it's a different type
and return something else.
So that when it's, as I said, five minus fancy three,
we actually get fancy three the first chance
instead of five so that you have the chance
to return fancy two like you wanted
and not have five itself return.
- Boring too, yeah.
So I think one example that comes to mind
that I think might be relevant would be working with units.
So we've got cool libraries like Pint and others
where you can say, this is not just the number five,
but this is five kilograms.
And if I subtract 100 milligrams from it,
it's not negative 95, it's four point whatever,
nine five or whatever it turns out to be.
And so in this case, if you took a regular number
and one of these numbers with units,
you could get a number with units back potentially.
- Yeah, that's a very good example, right?
This is where those, once again, very simple syntax
that in the common case and in your general use day to day
makes total sense and happens,
has some really important but subtle,
if you don't know about them, semantics
to make sure that those reasonable expectations are met.
I totally didn't even think about this
when I was writing this blog post.
I'm like, oh yeah, God, that's a good point.
I do wanna make sure that I get my special version
of everything when I happen to be on the right hand side,
just 'cause I happen to be written on the right hand side.
Plus is a really good example in this one, right?
Like you could have written A plus B or B plus A,
makes zero difference.
I mean, that operator is supposed to be communicative.
So it can be totally just dumb luck
based on how I just happened to be thinking that day,
what I put on the left side
and what I put on the right side.
And that would suddenly make a difference.
And in this case, it just helps make sure
that what you would think is the priority order
of who you'd want to handle this for you,
gets that priority.
But once again, it's a thing you just never think about
day to day, but in actuality,
when you think about the really key ways
that Python operates, makes a surprising difference.
- Yeah, that seemingly leakiness at the language of like,
well, sometimes it gives you the right answer,
sometimes it doesn't, depending on how you add.
People wouldn't love that.
- Yeah, and then the last bit of subtlety on that one
is this only happens if,
by the way, dunder sub and dunder rsub are different.
So that's another check we do because at the C level,
they're actually equivalent.
Like there is no left side versus right side thing here.
So we actually check to make sure we don't waste our time
asking you, hey, can you do this
and get back not implemented,
and then calling it a reverse
and getting the exact same result
because underneath it all is the exact same method.
- Right.
- So it's one of those fun things of,
once again, lots of little things here to try to optimize,
as you said, as best we can,
and in this case, it's one of those,
well, if we know you're not gonna work this way
with the exact same method,
then we just swap the order of the stuff.
Why are we gonna ask you again?
So we just skip that.
So it's a minor thing,
but semantics are there to try to help with the performance.
- I think as people go through your series here,
I think they're gonna get a deep appreciation
for edge cases and subtlety.
- Yeah, yeah.
- What do you have over the last few days?
- I learned a lot.
I mean, it was one of the reasons I finished it
is I finished the series as well,
even though I, partway through, went like,
yeah, you know what?
I'm not gonna implement Python from scratch,
but I was learning enough and it was fun.
Like I got to dive a bit deep.
I got to ask the Python core team,
it was like from people, primarily Guido,
who obviously were there when these decisions were made,
like, why this way?
Like, why did we choose this?
And just trying to understand,
somewhat historically, how did these things happen?
Like, I think a lot of people don't realize
how old Python is, right?
Like February of 1991 is when Python came out.
It predates Linux going public.
Like people really forget that fact.
It's been around for over 32 years.
Decisions were made a long time ago,
and I know everyone got all upset
over the two to three transition,
and some people still get upset
whenever we push new changes or whatever,
but do realize--
- I can't believe you just canceled 3.7.
I like that version.
- But the key thing here is the core concepts still work.
Subtraction still works, right?
From the way it worked back then,
there's not been a massive upheaval here.
It's just a lot of us end up using stuff
that's kind of fancy,
and sometimes the fancy stuff gets a little tweaks and stuff,
but the really core low-level stuff
really hasn't shifted very much.
So if at all, depending on your view--
- To give people a sense of the timing,
the release of Python predates by a couple of years
the release of the web, right?
The web was '93, I think.
And so, yeah.
- Yeah, one of the early browsers was actually,
Guido was writing in Python and TK.
- Incredible. - Gradle.
- So we talked about simple things like thing.value,
A minus B.
The next simple one is the import statement,
'cause imports are simple.
Honestly, I think imports are,
if you come from a compiled language,
you've really gotta change your mindset, right?
And so I think this one actually is maybe the opposite
end of that spectrum a little.
- Oh yes, I will fully out some of my coworkers
who are, because VS Code is written in TypeScript
as an Electron app,
so they live in TypeScript all day long.
The fact that Python's imports work the way they are
in terms of flexibility and just the way it works,
and you're not just specifying file paths to everything,
just really throws them for a loop,
and they go like, "Why is it so complicated?"
Once again, the flexibility that Python gives you
where the base case, normal case,
of if you just do things the way,
it's Python code and directory kind of thing just works,
versus I can also import something from a URL if I want,
that's totally optional.
I could keep all my code in a SQLite database
and import from there, totally possible, right?
So it's one of these things, once again,
where if you're coming from a Python mindset
of just what makes sense, it all just works.
I realize when you come in with an outside perspective,
it can look kind of crazy,
but you also have to understand
that a lot of the designs were made A, decades ago,
and B, there's a lot of flexibility there
that you may or may not be taking advantage of,
but there are others who are,
and so that's kind of why it exists that way.
- Yeah, indeed.
- And yes, this posts, yeah.
So for those of you who don't know,
I actually am responsible for import lib
and re-implementing Python's import system in Python itself.
And so I know these details a little too well.
Yeah, so.
- Still have nightmares about some of them?
- No, luckily.
Luckily, import lib, in terms of actual import itself,
like I'm ignoring import lib.resources
or import lib.metadata.
Jason Coons mainly manages those modules.
It's been stable enough for long enough now
that there's no real crazy surprises anymore.
Honestly, the biggest headache
is people doing imports in their threads.
So my word of advice to everyone,
don't do imports in threads.
If you're gonna do imports,
do them on your main thread up front,
then spawn your threads.
Don't do imports as a side effect of anything either.
Right, it's circular imports, same thing.
It's just, just don't.
Your life will be so much easier.
But that's honestly where any of the bug reports
that ever come in come from,
is due to either circular imports
and people wondering why,
or weird race conditions with threads on imports
and just trying to get the locking down
such that things lead to the right outcome.
Actually 3.12 almost got held up a little bit
due to a slight memory leak
from the newest version of tracking imports via threads.
There was a slight leak of basically an empty dictionary
every time you did an important thread
and we didn't wanna have that leak.
So we cleaned it up, but yeah,
it was a lot of subtlety.
- Oh, we've got lots of memory, Brett.
We don't need to worry about those things anymore.
No, just kidding.
- Yeah, there's no reason everyone gets excited
every time Apple launches a new M chip, right?
We've had enough processing power
since we got someone on the moon with hemihertz.
- Exactly.
No one needs more than seven hertz.
You know the favorite fan saying, no, just kidding.
So, you know, one of the real big differences, I think,
here is that like import runs code, right?
Like rather than tells the compiler,
these things are in scope if you want them,
but no, it's like running code.
And if people are wondering where that weird
dunder name equals dunder main,
so you don't run too much code during imports
and those sorts of things, right?
- Yeah, actually, and this is an interesting case
where it's very much syntactic sugar,
but it's also very much syntactic sugar
actually for the byte code.
So the thing here is when you do import spam, right?
Or whatever module you want to import,
it effectively ends up being a call
to the dunder import built-in function
where it passes in spam as the name,
and then it passes in all the globals and the locals
for where it gets called for name resolution
and stuff like this is where you do relative imports
with dot, you know?
- Yeah, exactly.
Why are all these arguments going to import?
You just need to know where A, A.py or the package A lives,
and you're good to go until you say,
you know, dot, dot this or from dot.
- Yeah, from dot, dot A import B kind of stuff.
Like there's a surprising amount of information
you need to pass in to do those kinds of resolutions
and such from imports, right?
All that kind of thing to make sure those things all exist
'cause what you're effectively doing in a from import
is if you list multiple ones,
you're basically importing the module
that those things are in and then making sure
that attribute gets set on the thing you're wanting
so that you can then grab it later and all sorts of stuff.
But the other key thing is the dunder import function
is structured to kind of make the upcode easier, right?
'Cause it's very structured to just push things
onto the stack that Python's executing
and then make the call to dunder import
where it's just like, yeah, everything's already there.
But it's also why it's so funky.
You should never call it directly in your own code, right?
Like dunder imports very much,
it's borderline implementation detail
on this kind of thing.
This is why you should use import lib dot import module,
right, that function exists specifically
and I designed it specifically for those cases
where you need to do dynamic imports
and you want a very clean, simple API
because like the return type for dunder import
very much is designed for the upcode
so that whether you're doing an import something
or from something import other thing, right?
Like the return value makes sense
or that for the bytecode level
does not make sense for human beings, right?
So once again, do not call dunder import directly.
You should always be calling import lib dot import module
if you need something dynamically to import.
- Or just use the word import.
- Yeah, or just import.
- Yeah, just import.
Yeah, right up here you have all the different variations.
Like what does it mean to say from thing,
import something as, or just import something
or relative imports.
So people can see all the different,
again, back to that flexibility that you talked about.
- Exactly, so it's definitely one of these things though
where in the end it effectively just boils down
to a function call, right?
That piece of syntax of import really is just a function call
with an assignment in the end.
- Yeah. - And it's really all it is.
It's the unraveling, all the trickery
is really behind the dunder import function
but the actual syntax is not crazy actually.
But it literally is a function call.
You can fully re-implement import.
Yeah, but just calling dunder import
and just doing the proper assignment.
- Nice.
Some confirmation of your advice out there.
Nathan says, my data science professor
always says the same thing, import first, which is good.
But also, is there a way to remove syntactical sugar
on an example but not fully through disassembly?
- Yeah, I mean, so you can actually write a tool
that will take Python syntax and unravel it.
I actually started it but it was just too much of a headache
'cause there's so many variations and edge cases
and all that stuff to handle
and there was no package out there
that quite did what I needed it to do
to make my life easier.
- Yeah, what's the canonical destination, right?
If I undo a with statement on a lock,
how far do I wanna go back?
- Yeah, well, and I can understand people
wanting to do it to maybe learn,
but I mean, it's gonna be a learning thing,
not really a performance thing.
- It might be slower, right?
Because some of this stuff is happening at the C level.
- No, yeah, exactly.
If you go back to our A plus B example,
it actually definitely will be slower
as things happen in Python because once again,
with the speed performance improvements
that have been going in,
the bytecode is able to go like,
all right, is this an int and an int?
Okay, well, then we know exactly how to do integer math,
let's just do it, right?
And then it can add cards in and go like,
okay, quick check, A, B, yes, okay,
do the binary int add thing, right?
Where it just very obviously does that.
But if you unravel it, you can't do that
'cause now you're just doing method calls, right?
You can't hide those details anymore
and put all that stuff. - Exactly.
- But yeah, but to answer the question,
you totally could write a tool to do this
and I kinda started one and it just wasn't fun,
so I just stopped 'cause I just had a thing.
- Sometimes you see this in the editor as well
when editors will give you previews.
So for example, if you use optional of a thing
or thing, pipe, none,
and then you hover over it in the editor,
even if you used optional, it'll say thing, pipe, none
because it's like, those mean the same thing,
I'm gonna just represent them in one way.
Yeah, yeah, interesting.
Okay, we have a bunch more things to cover,
but we don't have really any time.
My goal with this, having you on here
to talk about this stuff,
is really kinda like to highlight the whole series
and people should go,
and we've been kinda hand-waving
'cause reading C code on air is not ideal.
- No. - But I think it'd be
a whole other idea, but really to highlight
your whole series and people can just dive
into this pretty deep and I think they'll have
a much better appreciation for when you write
this one line, oh my goodness,
this is actually what's happening.
- And how I actually found a bug in Python, thanks to it.
- Okay, tell us quick about that.
- Well, I mean, it's covered in the in-place
binary operator, augmented assignment post.
So you know how you can do A plus equals B
and it's like doing A equals A plus B?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so it turned out it was broken for PAL.
So when you could do A star star B,
that's A to the B power.
Yeah, it turned out the semantics were busted
for star star equals.
- Wow, okay.
- And no one had ever noticed 'cause obviously
people do not write custom implementations
of Thunder PAL 'cause effectively what turned out was,
and someone actually discovered it and reported it,
I just didn't know about it,
that basically when you did that,
so the in-place augmented assignment,
there's I versions of everything like I add,
Thunder I add, Thunder I mul, Thunder I PAL, right?
Turns out for all of them, they did the right thing
except for power where it would check for I PAL.
And I mean, in all these scenarios,
because A plus equals B is the same as A equals A plus B,
if the I version returns not implemented,
it falls back to just doing the binary operator
and then doing the assignment, right?
So like if I plus, so I plus equals B,
unravels to A dot I PAL,
A dot Thunder I PAL with B as an argument,
if that returns not implemented,
then it devolves into A plus B,
A equals the result of that, right?
In the PAL case, if you return not implemented
on Thunder I PAL, it didn't fall back to PAL, Thunder PAL.
- Okay.
- It just--
- It just crashed, so I don't know what to do here.
- It was just an exception.
It's like, yeah, no.
- I suppose that's better than the wrong answer.
Like actually, the square of nine is 18.
- It really, it threw me for a loop
because I wrote code to verify all my unraveling
and for the augmented assignment for PAL
just kept not working.
It was like, what the heck's going on?
And then I had to dig into the C code.
- What am I doing wrong here?
- And it was like, wait a second,
that code unravels calling this C code,
calling this C code.
And it didn't check that return value.
And calling it under IPAL, it's like,
well, did return not implemented?
And if it did, then we've got to try the other version.
It just didn't.
It's just like, oh, no, it's just the value just got returned.
It just didn't even check.
And I think we figured out it happened
when the third argument to PAL got added
and it was just someone overlooked it.
- I see, yeah.
- But it's been sitting there for years.
- I mean, you don't want it to be overlooked,
but yeah, you're looking through these things,
you can tell that they're pretty subtle.
There's a lot going on in the different special cases.
So I can see it wouldn't hit you in the face
that you necessarily missed something right away.
- Exactly, yeah.
I don't fault anyone at all.
I think we were just missing a test case somewhere
to make sure that that happened.
And once again, I don't think people define
their own custom PAL operator for their types.
- There's a whole bunch of mathematicians going,
but we do.
- We do.
(laughing)
- Or physicists or something.
- Yep.
- All right, we're pretty much out of time
to go any deeper on this.
And I think that, that's all right,
I think people got a really good sense
of what's happening, what you mean with your series here.
And hopefully they're inspired to go check it out.
But I do, while I have this import stuff on the screen,
and you've done so much work with Importlib,
will there ever be a time where hot reload type of stuff
is a thing, like I edit this file in this web app,
and it's got this project, it's been running,
and I just, maybe could we have a file watcher
trigger this module to re-import?
Not necessarily saying it's a good idea,
but have you--
- Do you mean like, you want automatic import lib.reload?
- Yes, or even like the lib reload stuff,
a lot of times you can do it,
but it's kind of discouraged because,
I think largely because of the side effects,
what can happen there, or--
- No, so to be very specific,
if you call a module,
if you call import lib.reload on a module,
it effectively reruns import on that module.
The problem is, is all the references you have to objects,
don't change.
- Yeah, exactly.
- So if you got something out of that module,
like let's say there's a global dictionary
that you stored a reference to a way that you expected--
- Right, or a function or a class, maybe.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- And then you call reload,
everyone else in the future is gonna get the new module,
and they'll get the new version of all the things
that were in that module,
but all that stuff you still have reference to do,
that didn't get magically taken away or garbage collected,
and we can't really necessarily swap it
underneath you either,
'cause the whole type could have changed.
- Right, right, right.
- So, I mean, if you really wanted to set up
your own import system that does file monitoring
and automatic calls import lib.reload,
you could totally do that today.
There's nothing stopping you,
but you have to just be very aware that--
- Only sometimes will it have a good effect.
- Yeah, it'll have an effect, yeah.
It's just whether it's gonna do what you expect,
and that's why import lib.reload is discouraged,
because people often don't quite understand
the side effects and the things you have to watch out for
to understand that it's gonna do what you expect.
And yeah, especially when you import, do from imports,
right, 'cause then you're getting the direct objects
off the module instead of the module itself,
'cause if it doesn't in place reimport,
so if you did import spam and you reloaded spam,
the attributes off of spam will now be the new stuff,
'cause we actually changed that dictionary in place.
But if you did from spam import function,
function is not gonna change.
There's another reason why I always tell everybody,
don't import the objects from a module,
import to the module, right?
I find it, I personally find it more readable,
'cause I can look at the code,
no matter where I am in the file,
and know where that function came from.
It's not from this module, it's from somewhere else.
- I am always with you.
I'm almost never from thing import other thing.
- Yeah, unless it's a deep module in a package,
in which case that makes sense,
'cause you'll still do module.thing.
- Right, right.
Well, even though I have that,
if it's like four levels deep, I'll do the first three,
and then from the first three,
import the last step of the module,
so you can say like data layer dot, you know.
- Exactly.
- Update rather than just update.
Like, well, what does update mean?
I don't know.
- Exactly, yeah.
I mean, the canonical example is random.
You see the function random in your code.
Whose random is that?
Is that from the random module?
Is that from NumPy?
Did you implement random?
Whose random is that?
- Yeah. - You just don't know.
- But if you saw np.random, you'd know.
- Exactly.
- Yeah. - If you know what np was.
- If you did, of course.
All right, well, Brett, I guess,
give you a chance to kind of summarize
final, final thoughts here on your Syntactic Sugar series,
and tell people how to get it and stuff.
- Yeah, I mean, you can go to my blog.
It's on snarky.ca.
It has the tag Syntactic Sugar.
I'm sure Michael will include it in the show notes.
Don't feel the need to read all of it,
but do look at least the first one or two,
because I do go into more detail
on how you can kind of go exploring on your own
in way more detail in those posts than I do towards the end,
'cause I'll be honest, I've lost a bit of steam
in diving into all the deep layers.
I wanted to get the blog post series done after two years.
It was one of those, okay, go look at the earlier ones.
They'll explain how to figure out how to go from syntax
to the byte code to the C code,
and then know where to look in the C code,
which by the way, you don't have to understand the C code.
It's not, A, it's not crazy C code,
but it's also not necessarily critical.
I do try to write down the Python equivalents for everything
so it's there if you do understand C,
but don't feel intimidated if you don't.
And hopefully you just find it interesting, right?
Like you've always wondered how the heck does this work?
If it's in the blog post,
you'll be able to have a better understanding,
hopefully, of how things work, 'cause as I said,
I honestly even learned some details that I forgot
or never even knew about some of the semantics
behind Python and how things actually work
underneath the hood, and it just gave me
a better understanding to understand.
When things do and don't happen the way I expect.
And just honestly appreciate all the work
everyone's put into language over the decades
to make it all seemingly seem simple,
and yet it's surprisingly complex.
- Yeah, I don't think you need to read them all either,
as somebody who read most of them the last couple days.
- No, you don't.
- If you're a completionist, go for it.
But yes, you definitely do not need to.
- But I do think going through it,
pick out the ones, there's a whole bunch
of different topics, pick out the ones that are,
you're like, oh, I did always wonder how that one worked.
And pretty much, with the exception of PaaS,
I think you'll be like, oh my gosh,
I had no idea what was involved here.
- Yeah, PaaS was very much just a,
I had a checklist of every piece of syntax
and every single keyword, and the blog post on PaaS,
I think is like three sentences,
and half of it's saying this is gonna be
the shortest post in this whole series.
Yeah.
- Yeah, it was contending with the dot, dot, dot,
which we haven't even had a chance
to talk about ellipsis versus PaaS,
but I think we're out of time, Brett.
So thanks for being here.
Thanks for all you do.
I mean, steering council, core dev, author,
VS Code, et cetera, a lot of contributions.
- Thanks, thanks for having me back on yet again,
and hopefully I've not worn out my welcome still.
- No, you're already thinking about
what next WebAssembly Rust thing we'll get together on.
Thanks for being here, see you later.
- Thanks, Michael.
- Yep.
Thank you.